



PC Gopher User Manual
Version 1.23

2 October 1991







Microcomputer & Workstation Networks Center
University of Minnesota
Room 125 Shepherd Labs
100 Union St. SE
Minneapolis, MN 55455

(C) 1991 University of Minnesota





















I. INTRODUCTION

This manual describes PC Gopher, a program for IBM and compatible
microcomputers that run the MS-DOS operating system.  PC Gopher is a
program that lets you search for and retrieve information stored on
other computers, known as Gopher Servers. 

PC Gopher uses the standard IBM character set to emulate a graphical
user interface (GUI).  For this reason, PC Gopher runs on a wide range
of IBM PCs and compatibles, including the earliest PCs which contained a
monochrome display adapter (with no graphics support).  In other words,
PC Gopher does not require that you install a special graphics display
adapter in your computer. 

With a GUI, you interact with the program by responding to graphical
symbols which appear on the computer screen, rather than by issuing
single line commands (as with the MS-DOS operating system).  Because of
its graphical user interface, PC Gopher is largely self-explanatory.  If
you are familiar with the GUI in Microsoft Windows or the Apple
Macintosh operating system, you will be able to run PC Gopher without
much help from this manual.

We allow free distribution of PC Gopher to all interested parties as
long as our copyright notices are not altered or removed and you do not
charge others for distribution of our software.

Help!
 
If you run into difficulties installing or using PC Gopher, or have bug
reports, suggestions, or general comments, you can send E-mail to us at:

gopher@boombox.micro.umn.edu

or if you prefer paper mail:

PC Gopher Project
Microcomputer & Workstation Networks Center
University of Minnesota
Room 125 Shepherd Labs
100 Union St. SE
Minneapolis, MN 55455
U.S.A.

In all of your correspondence pertaining to PC Gopher, please indicate:

 - your PC Gopher version number; and
 - your operating system and version number (e.g., DOS 3.2).

Background and Philosophy

Individuals and departments at the University of Minnesota need fast
access to large amounts of information.   Additionally, the departments
responsible for this information need a fast and simple way to make
information available. The Gopher Project was started in reponse to
these needs;  PC Gopher will allow you to navigate through a universe of
information provided by other computers, known as Gopher Servers.
Information is distributed amongst the Gopher Servers, but you don't
need to know anything about where the information is.  Once the PC
Gopher program has connected to one Gopher Server, you will be able to
browse through information on any additional Gopher Servers that the
first server knows about.

Information is presented in the form of lists of items; items can be
files, directories (somewhat like DOS directories) containing other
directories or files, or Index Servers, computers that will perform
searches for files containing text that you specify.

Once you've found a file containing the information you need, PC Gopher
can display the file in a window; it can also save it as a text file for
you to view or edit with the word processor of your choice.



II.  THE PC GOPHER USER INTERFACE

The Gopher Window

The PC Gopher screen consists of a window which displays a moveable list
of items for you to choose from.  The list can be scrolled up and down
by clicking on the up or down arrows on the right side of the list, or
by using the arrow keys.  The currently selected item is indicated by
highlighting; the text and background colors of the currently selected
item are colored differently than the rest of the list, or are shown in
inverse video on a monochrome monitor.

Buttons

The window also contains  buttons; these are rectangular areas of the
screen which will respond to a mouse click by performing some action.
Buttons can also be operated by repeatedly hitting the <TAB> key until
the button is highlighted, and then hitting the <ENTER> key.

Dialog Boxes

Dialog boxes allow the PC Gopher program to ask you for information.
When you chose an Index Server (explained below) from the list of items,
a dialog box will pop up to allow you to enter the text to search
for.  If you type in more text than will fit within the dialog box, the
text will scroll automatically.

The Menu Bar

The very top line of the computer screen contains PC Gopher's menu bar
with three menu labels.  The menu bar looks like this:

	#      File     Window       Options

The menu bar is the primary mechanism you use to communicate with the PC
Gopher program.  The menus have pull-down labels; that is, when you
select a title in the menu bar, a list of specific commands are dropped
down from the menu label and displayed in a list. If one of the commands
in a pull-down menu is followed by three periods (...), choosing that
command will display a modal dialog box (explained later in this
section).  If a command in a pull-down menu is not followed by three
periods, this means th at once you choose it, the indicated action will
occur immediately.

You can use either a mouse or keyboard to select commands.  To use a
mouse, click on the desired menu title to display the pull-down menu.
(Use only the left mouse button if your mouse has more than one button).
Then click the desired command.  Alternatively,  you can push the mouse
button down over a menu title and then continue to hold the mouse button
down while you drag straight down from the menu title to the desired
menu command, and then release the mouse button.  If you decide not to
choose a comman d, just drag out of the boundaries of the pull-down menu
and no action will be performed.

To choose menu commands using the keyboard, first pull down the menu.
You do this by pressing the F10 key to make the menu bar active.  (When
the menu bar is active, one menu title is highlighted.)  If the menu
title you want is not the one currently highlighted, use the arrow keys
to move to the right or left along the menu bar, until the menu title
you want to select appears highlighted. (Alternatively, you can just
type the first letter of the menu title.)  Then press the <ENTER> key.
This will cause t he menu to pull down.  There is a hot-key alternative
method to pull-down a menu.  Hold the Alt key down while typing the
letter corresponding to the first letter of the menu title you want
(e.g., type Alt-F to pull down the File menu). The hot key to pull-down
the # menu (called the system menu) is Alt-Spacebar.

Once the menu you want is pulled down, use the up and down arrow keys to
highlight the command you want.  Then press <ENTER> to choose (perform)
the highlighted command.  (As a shortcut:  press the key corresponding
to the highlighted letter of the desired command in order to choose that
command.)

Once you select a menu command, PC Gopher will do one of two things:
carry out the command directly or display a modal dialog box.

The Status Bar

PC Gopher's status bar is located across the bottom line of the screen.
The status bar looks like this:

	F10 Menus     Alt-X  Exit     Alt-G  New Gopher     Alt-F3  Close
	
The status bar contains hot spots.  Hot spots are located wherever words
occur in the status bar.  For example, "Alt-G  New Gopher" constitutes
one hot spot.  Hot spots are separated from each other by more than one
space.   When you click on a hot spot with a mouse, the indicated
function will occur.  For example, when you click on the words "Alt-G
New Gopher", PC Gopher will open a new Gopher window, and when you click
on the words "Alt-X  Exit", PC Gopher will shut down and return you to
the DOS prompt.

To activate a hot spot without using a mouse, you type a hot-key.  For
example, if you hold down the Alt key and press the F3 function key, PC
Gopher will close the frontmost window.

Menu Structure

The individual items under the pull-down menus are organized as follows.
Highlighted letters (shown here as capital letters) are used to perform
the various short-cuts described in the previous section and elsewhere
in this manual.

Note that the key (capital) letter associated with each command is not
always the first letter of the command).  In addition, some menu
commands are considered to be so important that they can be activated
with a keyboard alternative.  These keys are also shown below.

The Preferences menu has a submenu listing user-configurable preferences;
this submenu works the same way that the other menus do.

	Menu Title	Commands		Keyboard Alternative
        ----------      --------                --------------------

	#             	About...
	                Calculator
			Calendar
                        Puzzle
                        DOS Shell

	File
	                New gopher			Alt-G
			Save...				Alt-S
			Exit				Alt-X

	Window
	                Next				F6
			Zoom				F5
			Move			        Ctrl-F5
			Close				Alt-F3

	Options
	                Configure...			Alt-C
                        Preferences >
                              Mouse...
                              Video Mode




Windows

PC Gopher uses windows to display information.  There are two different
types of windows in PC Gopher; the Gopher window, which displays lists
of items for you to choose from, and the file display window, which
displays the contents of a file that you've chosen.

Both windows can be positioned anywhere on the screen, with the mouse or
the keyboard.  To move a window with the mouse, position the cursor over
the title bar of the window (the horizontal line marking the window's
top edge), then press and hold the mouse button as you move the mouse.
To move a window with the keyboard, type Ctrl-F5, and use the arrow keys
to move the window around the screen.

In the upper left-hand corner of each window is a small rectangle
enclosed in square brackets.  This is the window's close box; clicking
with the mouse in the close box will close the window.  To close a
window using the keyboard, type "Alt-F3".

In addition to these capabilities, the file display window can be
resized.  To resize the window with the mouse, position the cursor in
the lower right-hand corner, press the mouse button, and move the mouse.
To resize the window from the keyboard, type "Ctrl-F5" (just like you
did to move the window), hold the shift key down, and use the arrow
keys.



III.  PC GOPHER INSTALLATION

System Requirements

To run PC Gopher, your microcomputer must be connected to a local area
network (LAN).  Usually, the LAN will be connected to the campus
backbone network, allowing you to find information located on Gopher
servers outside of your network.

For your microcomputer to operate on the LAN, you must have a network
adapter card installed.  In order to run PC Gopher, your network adapter
card must be one supported by the Clarkson packet drivers, mentioned in
the "Configuring PC Gopher" section below.  (For a list of network
adapter cards currently supported by the Clarkson Packet Drivers, please
consult our accompanying documentation entitled "Installing the Clarkson
Packet Drivers".)

PC Gopher runs under DOS version 3.0 or greater and requires 640K of
RAM.  PC Gopher was designed to run on a wide range of IBM PCs and
compatibles, including the earliest PCs which contained only a
monochrome display adapter (no graphics support).

A Microsoft-compatible mouse is helpful but optional.  You must load
mouse driver software into your system before running PC Gopher.  Note
also that if your mouse contains more than one mouse button, you will be
using only the left mouse button when running PC Gopher.

How to Obtain PC Gopher

PC Gopher software consists of two components: a Clarkson Packet driver
(matched to your microcomputer's network adapter card), and the PC
Gopher program (GOPHER.EXE) itself.  All the software components may be
obtained on the internet through anonymous FTP from

	boombox.micro.umn.edu

(IP address 128.101.95.95).  Look in the UNIX directory called

	/pub//pub/gopher/PC_client

and get the latest available version.

Loading PC Gopher and the Clarkson Packet Driver

Each Clarkson packet driver is a specialized piece of software designed
to talk to a specific type of network adapter card.  In order to run PC
Gopher, the appropriate Clarkson packet driver must be loaded into RAM
(random-access memory) each time you start up your computer.  To do
this, you first run the appropriate packet driver by typing the packet
driver name, followed by the necessary parameters, as described in our
accompanying documentation entitled "Installing the Clarkson Packet
Drivers".  If you'd like the packet driver to load automatically
whenever you start up your computer, you can add the packet driver
command and parameters to your AUTOEXEC.BAT file.

After you have installed the appropriate packet driver, copy the
GOPHER.EXE file into a directory on your hard disk.

For example, suppose you have a 3Com 3c523 ethernet card installed in
your PC.  The following two command lines represent an example of the
steps needed to load the packet driver and start PC Gopher (of course,
the specific packet driver and parameters will depend on your
configuration).  Type each line following the command prompt and end
each line by pressing the <ENTER> key:

        3C523 0x60 0x3 0x300

        GOPHER

At this point you are running PC Gopher.  As long as you do not turn the
power off to your computer, you can quit PC Gopher and do other things
and then start PC Gopher again without re-loading the packet driver.
Also if you already have the packet driver loaded for other programs
like FTP, Telnet, or tn3270, you do not need to re-load the packet
driver before running PC Gopher.

Configuring PC Gopher

When you use PC Gopher for the first time, you need to enter some
configuration information specific to your microcomputer.  PC Gopher
needs these configuration parameters in order to identify your computer
on the network.  When you run the program for the first time, PC Gopher
will display a "Configure" dialog box, allowing you to enter the
required parameters. You must enter all of the parameters, according to
the instructions which follow. (Consult your network administrator for
the correct parameter information .)  You will not need to enter
parameter information during subsequent PC Gopher sessions, because PC
Gopher will save the parameters you have entered.  You can modify your
configuration settings at any time by selecting Configure from the
Options pull-down menu.

Initially, the Gopher Server line will contain the name of our main
Gopher Server.  Since this line is already selected, you can simply type
in the name of the Gopher Server you wish to use.  To enter or edit  any
of the parameters in the Configure dialog box, use the <TAB> key (or Up
and Down arrow keys) to advance to the appropriate parameter field.
Then enter the appropriate parameter information.

Some of the parameters can be left unchanged if your network has access
to a BOOTP server; these parameters are indicated below.  To use BOOTP,
check the "Use BOOTP" option box (to check an option box with the keyboard,
select it with the <TAB> key, and then hit the spacebar).  If you use BOOTP,
you may still specify your own parameters; PC Gopher will use whatever
addressing information you specify, and will use BOOTP to get the addresses
that you leave set to '0.0.0.0'.

A brief description of each of the parameters follows:

Gopher Server

This is the name of any gopher server on campus.  Your department may be
running its own gopher server; if not, you are welcome to use our
server, which goes by the name of :
	
		gopher.micro.umn.edu 
		
PC Gopher will attempt to connect to this server when you issue a "New
Gopher" command.  Your explorations are not restricted to information
stroed on this particular server, but you will always start off here.

Port Number

This is the port number that PC Gopher will use to attempt to connect to
the gopher server named above.  Currently, gopher servers use port 150
for connections.

Name Server IP Address

A name server converts a gopher server name into an IP address.  You
type in the IP address of your nameserver in this parameter field (see
your network administrator for the value to enter).  If you are using
BOOTP, you don't need to change this field; it can remain "0.0.0.0".

Gateway IP Address

A gateway is a device which gives your computer access to the outside
world, by transferring information from one type of network to another.
If you want to use PC Gopher to look at information on servers beyond
your local area network (LAN), you must specify the IP address of your
gateway.  Contact your network administrator for the IP address of the
gateway accessible to your LAN.  If you are using BOOTP, you don't need
to change this field; it can remain "0.0.0.0".

Microcomputer IP address

This is the IP address of your individual microcomputer or workstation.
See your network administrator for a microcomputer IP address
assignment.  If you are using BOOTP, you don't need to change this
field; it can remain "0.0.0.0".

Net Mask

The net mask parameter has to do with how your local area network is
configured and connected to the backbone network at your work site.  See
your network administrator for the correct value to enter here.  Most
sites are configured to use a net mask of 255.255.255.0 (the default
value).  If you are using BOOTP, you don't need to change this field; it
can remain "0.0.0.0".
 
I/O Timeout (sec)

This parameter sets the maximum time allowed for PC Gopher to send and
receive data from your computer to the gopher server.   With the default
value of 10 seconds, PC Gopher will wait 10 seconds for a response from
the gopher server.  If a response does not come through within 10
seconds, PC Gopher will present an error message at the bottom of the
Gopher window and abort the operation in progress.  If a gopher server
is slow and frequently times out, you may need to increase this
parameter value. 

Connect Timeout (sec)

When PC Gopher attempts to connect to a gopher server, this parameter
sets the maximum number of seconds it will wait for the gopher server to
acknowledge your attempt to connect.  The default value of 5 seconds is
sufficient for most gopher servers.  If an error message is displayed
stating "can't connect" when trying to connect to a server, try
increasing this value. 

Name Lookup Timeout (sec)

This parameter sets the maximum number of seconds allowed for the domain
name server on the network to convert a gopher server name to an IP
address.  The default value is set to 5 seconds.  If an error message is
displayed stating "can't get IP address" when trying to connect to a
gopher server, try increasing this value.  

When you have finished entering the parameters, click on the Ok button
to have PC Gopher save your changes to the configuration.  If you decide
you don't want your parameter changes to be saved, click on the Cancel
button.

Alternate Configuration Files

You may specify the use of an alternate configuration file for PC Gopher
to use; this will allow you to save different configurations and use the
appropriate one.  To specify the configuration file, start PC Gopher by
typing the FULL PATH AND FILENAME after the name of the program.  For
example, to run PC Gopher and use the configuration file "MYFILE.CFG" in
the directory "\HOOPY" on the C: drive, you would start the program like
this:

     GOPHER C:\HOOPY\MYFILE.CFG

If you don't specify a configuration file, PC Gopher will attempt to use
CONFIG.IGP in the current directory; if the file doesn't exist, PC Gopher
will create it and then open the Configuration window to allow you to
change the default settings.



IV.  USING PC GOPHER

Once you have configured your PC Gopher program, you are ready to start
exploring the Gopher universe.  The Gopher universe is made up of many
different computers, all acting as Gopher Servers.  However, you don't
need to know anything about how these computers work, where they are, or
how to connect to them; PC Gopher handles all of these details for you.

To start exploring, choose "New Gopher" from the File menu, or click on
the words "Alt-G  New Gopher" on the status line (if you'd rather use
the keyboard, type Alt-G).  PC Gopher will open a Gopher window, and
attempt to connect to the server that you specified in the configuration
dialog box.  If the attempt is successful, PC Gopher will retrieve a
list of the items that the server knows about.  The list will look
something like this:

	<F>	About Internet Gopher
	<D>	Administrative Information
	<D>	Official Daily Bulletin
        <S>     Search Administrative Policies
	
Files

The first character of each line indicates whether the line refers to a
file, a subdirectory, or an index server.  In the above example, line
one refers to a file called "About Internet Gopher"; we know that it's a
file because the line begins with <F>.  To see the contents of this
file, double-click (click twice in rapid succession) the mouse button
while the cursor is anywhere on line one (or select line one with the
arrow keys, and hit the <ENTER> key).  PC Gopher will attempt to
retrieve the information in the file, and display it in a separate
window.  If the file is too l arge for PC Gopher to fit into available
memory, it will put up a dialog box requesting that you specify a
filename and directory to save the file in.  You can then open the file
with your favorite word processor to see the contents.

You may also choose to save the information that you get back as a file,
even if it is small enough for PC Gopher to display immediately in a
window.  Just choose "Save As..." from the File menu, and enter the
filename and directory that you want to save the file in.

Hypertext

The window that PC Gopher uses to display a file can be used to initiate
searches for other files.  To search for files containing a particular
word, double-click on the word in the file display window; PC Gopher
will return a list of all of the files it could find that contain that
word.  For example, if the file display window contained

	"The Microcomputer Center has information about Macintosh,
        IBM, and Zeos personal computers and software."
	
and you wanted to find files containing references to Zeos, you would
double-click on the word Zeos.

In order to use the Hypertext feature of PC Gopher, you must have a
mouse.  If you don't have a mouse, you can still search for files
containing text that you specify by using an Index Server (explained
below).

Directories

Directories are like folders or drawers full of files or other
directories.  When PC Gopher first connects to the Gopher Server that
you specify as your starting point, the list that you get back shows the
contents of the main or "root" directory of that server.  

The <D> at the beginning of the second line indicates that it refers to
a subdirectory.  This subdirectory is called "Administrative
Information", and may contain more files, subdirectories, and Index
Servers.  To see the contents of the subdirectory, double-click on line
two, or use the arrow keys to select line two, and hit <ENTER>.  PC
Gopher will request a list of the contents of the subdirectory that you
selected, and will present this list in the Gopher window. 

PC Gopher keeps track of the directories that you have traversed, and
will allow you to "back up" to previous directories by using the "Back"
button.  To back up, you can either click once on the "Back" button, or
select the button with the <TAB> key, and then hit <ENTER>.  In the
above example, if you clicked on the "Back" button, PC Gopher would
return you to the root directory, and display the original list of
items.

Index Servers

Lines that begin with a <S> indicate that the line refers to an Index
Server.  An Index Server is a computer that can search various Gopher
Servers for files containing text that you specify.  If you select an
index server, a dialog box will pop up for you to enter your search
text in.   To start the search, click on the "Search" button (or just
hit the <ENTER> key).

The index server returns a list of files that it knows about that
contain ALL of the text that you enter in the input box.  If you entered
the word "salmon", the Index Server would return a list of all of the
files containing that word.  If you entered "salmon spinach", the Index
Server will return a list of files that contain both the word "salmon"
and the word "spinach"; it would NOT return the names of files that had
only one of the two words.

Logical Operators

Logical operators are special words that allow you to set up specific
search conditions.  The logical operators "and", "or", and "not" are
supported by index servers.  You can use one or more of these operators
to narrow the field of your search.

For example, suppose you want to find files that contain the word
"salmon" or the word "spinach", but not both.  You can do this by
entering "salmon or spinach" in the input box.  You can also use the
word "and" to explicitly indicate that the files you're searching for
must contain both words; this allows you to set up specific search
conditions by using multiple logical operators.  Logical operators are
evaluated in right-to-left order; the search pattern "spinach and salmon
or broccoli" would result in a list of files that contained the word
spinach and the word salmon, or just the word broccoli.

To exclude words from the search pattern, use "not".  The search phrase
"macintosh not hypercard" would produce a list of files containing at
least one reference to macintosh, and no references to hypercard.

You can substitute the | character for the operator "or", and the &
character for the operator "and".  


V.  SUMMARY

Other Gopher Software

In addition to PC Gopher, Macintosh and NeXT versions of the Gopher
program exists; PC Gopher's user interface mirrors the Macintosh Gopher
user interface.  This consistency helps simplify training for departments
that have mixed computing environments.

Gopher Server software is also available for the Macintosh.  If you or
your department would like to set up a Gopher Server to distribute
information, we would be happy to help you.

If you want to discuss PC Gopher, call or visit the Microcomputer
HelpLine.  If you visit the HelpLine, our consultants can demonstrate PC
Gopher for you.

Acknowledgments

We wish to extend our thanks to Borland International of  Scotts Valley,
California, for continued excellence in the enhancement of their Turbo
Pascal product. We developed PC Gopher using Borland's TurboVision, an
object-oriented library of special-purpose routines provided with
Borland's newest release of Turbo Pascal, Version 6.0.

For the use of the Clarkson Packet Drivers, the foundation on which our
network products are based, we gratefully acknowledge Clarkson College
of Potsdam, New York.
