The Gopher Book 1.0
4/23/93

(see manual.txt for copyright and usage information)

RELEASE NOTES
-------------
Location
	- sunsite.unc.edu pub/micro/pc-stuff/ms-windows/winsock/gophbook.zip
	- ftp.cnidr.org pub/NIDR.tools/Gopher/pc/windows/gophbook.zip (soon)

New in this release
	- All of it!
	
Not in this release
	- CSO support.
	
Known Bugs
	- The Toolbook list box can't seem to handle more
	than 130 lines(?).  Therefore, if you turn to a 
	Gopher page that has more than 125 items, you are
	warned that only 125 will be received.  Doesn't
	seem like you would want Gopher pages with that
	many items anyway, ie we lose our simplicity!

	- Actually drawing the items on the screen is 
	SLOW!  If you notice, the mouse cursor turns from
	a black hole to an hour glass.  The hole represents
	network activity, the hourglass local activity.
	Its interesting to note that most of the time, the
	network activity is much faster than the local.  Hmmm.

Future Stuff

	- More useful bookmarking scheme.  Suggestions?

Files

	bookmark.ini	- Init file containing bookmarks
	gophbook.ini	- Configuration info
	gopher03.tbk	- Toolbook Gopher application
	manual.txt	- User's Manual
	nirsdk.dll	- Gopher protocol and TCP/IP API
	ps.exe		- Paint Shop shareware application
	ps.hlp		
	ps.wri		
	release.txt	- Release Notes
	tbkbase.dll	- Toolbook runtime distribution files.
	tbkcomp.dll
	tbkdb3.dll
	tbkdlg.dll
	tbkfile.dll
	tbknet.exe
	tbkutil.dll
	tbkwin.dll
	tbook.exe

Installing The Gopher Book

	1)  Copy GOPHBOOK.ZIP to an appropriate directory
	2)  Execute PKUNZIP.EXE -d GOPHBOOK.ZIP.  A subdirectory named
		GOPHBOOK will be created containing the files indicated
		in RELEASE.TXT
	3)  From the Windows Program Manager, select 'File', 'New'.
	4)  Select 'Group Item' and create a group named "Gopher Book 1.0"
	5)  Again select 'File', 'New'.
	6)  Select 'Program Item' and enter the following information:
		Description:  The Gopher Book 1.0
		Command Line: <path>\GOPHBOOK\TBOOK.EXE GOPHBOOK.TBK
		Working Dir: <path>\GOPHBOOK
		Shortcut: None
	7)  Double click on the icon and start Gophering!

